Guides: Introduce Rust Guide (#21435)
RIOT-OS/RIOT: doc/guides/rust_tutorials/create_project.mdx

---
title: "Creating a Project"
description: "Create a new project with a simple hello world program"
---

import GitSetup from '@components/gitsetup.mdx';
import Contact from '@components/contact.astro';

## Step 1: Create a new project

<GitSetup />

#### Open VS Code

> Now that we have added RIOT as a submodule to our project, we can start writing our hello world program.

Author: Lines are now broken :hospital: :man_health_worker:

## Step 3: Adjusting the Cargo.toml

Next, we need to adjust the `Cargo.toml` file to tell Cargo that we want to build for RIOT. Open the `Cargo.toml` file and replace its contents with the following:

```toml title="Cargo.toml"
[package]
name = "hello-world"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2021"

[lib]
crate-type = ["staticlib"]

[profile.release]
# Setting the panic mode has little effect on the built code (as Rust on RIOT
# supports no unwinding), but setting it allows builds on native without using
# the nightly-only lang_items feature.
panic = "abort"

[dependencies]
riot-wrappers = { version = "0.9.1", features = [ "set_panic_handler", "panic_handler_format" ] }

rust_riotmodules = { path = "./RIOT/sys/rust_riotmodules/" }
```

The most important part here are the dependencies. As mentioned in [Rust in Riot](/rust_tutorials/rust_in_riot/),
`riot-wrappers` is a crate that provides a set of wrappers around RIOT's C functions to make them usable from Rust in a safe way.

The other configuration options are not that important for now, but you can read more about them in the [Cargo documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html).

> ### IDE Setup

Author: Since rust_in_riot isnt mine I dont want to change it too drastically

> ### IDE Setup

Author: I added a reference to the actual tutorial at the top

This does mean that we can't use some of the standard library features like `std::io` or `std::collections`, however, there are a lot of `no_std` compatible crates available that provide similar functionality,
including `riot-wrappers` 😉

After that we import the functions that we will soon use to print to the console.
The `riot_main` macro helps RIOT figure out what our main function is and `println` is a macro that we can use to print to the console,
this replaces the `println!` macro from the standard library, since, as mentioned before, we can't use it on embedded systems.

Now we need to actually write the `main` function. Add the following code to the `src/lib.rs` file:

```rust title="src/lib.rs"
riot_main!(main);

fn main() {
    println!(
        "You are running RIOT using Rust on a(n) {} board.",
        riot_wrappers::BOARD
    );
}
```

![The Full Code in VSCode](img/create_project/03_lib.png)

Congratulations! You have now created your first Rust program for RIOT. 🎉

## Step 5: Building the Program

<Contact />

To build our program, we use the following command:

```bash title="Build the program"
make
```

> After building the program, we can run it using the following command to start the RIOT shell:

Author: Fixed

- `Cargo.lock`: This file contains information about the exact versions of your dependencies.
  - This file is automatically generated by Cargo and should not be edited manually so don't worry about it for now.

![The project structure](img/create_project/01_project_structure.png)

## Step 3: Creating the Makefile

Now that we have created our hello world program, we need to create a Makefile to build our program. The Makefile is a build automation tool that allows us to define how our program should be built. We create a new file called `Makefile` in the root directory of our project and add the following code:

```makefile
# name of your application
APPLICATION = hello-world

# If no BOARD is found in the environment, use this default:
BOARD ?= native

# Build in Docker by default (set to 0 to build locally)
BUILD_IN_DOCKER ?= 1

# This has to be the absolute path to the RIOT base directory:
RIOTBASE ?= $(CURDIR)/RIOT

# Comment this out to disable code in RIOT that does safety checking
# which is not needed in a production environment but helps in the
# development process:
DEVELHELP ?= 1

# Change this to 0 show compiler invocation lines by default:
QUIET ?= 1

> # Tell the build system to use the Rust crate here
> FEATURES_REQUIRED += rust_target
> # Make sure this matches the name of the Rust crate
> APPLICATION_RUST_MODULE = hello_world
> BASELIBS += $(APPLICATION_RUST_MODULE).module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Make sure this matches the name of the Rust crate
#
# A side effect of setting a name is that Rust becomes part of this application's build process.
APPLICATION_RUST_MODULE = hello_world
```

This has been simplified in recent versions. (IDK how much of the explanatory line makes sense for users at this point).
